
Well, hello there.
So today I want to talk about agentic engineering.
Now, this is a pretty new term that's been popping up
all over social media lately.
And I know a lot of people are going to probably say,
isn't this just vibe coding? And in my opinion,
it's totally different. There's a big difference
between people just prompting ChatGPT or
Gemini and one shouting some code that they're going
to copy paste and saying, hey, look, I built something.
And when you look at the image, it's just pointing
to their local host. There's a big difference between that
and what I do at work every single day. And don't
get me wrong. I think it's amazing that a lot of
people are actively trying to build things and they're
excited about AI coding and just doing things.
And I think that is great. But on the flip side,
the term like vibe coding being synonymous with.
AI coding, in my opinion, is essentially a disservice to
the entire industry. Basically, when everyone who is doing
AI coding is getting lumped up, all together with
vibe coding, I don't think that's the right approach.
So today we're gonna talk about what agentic
engineering is and what I think are the five pillars
that make up this new practice. Before we
dive in, I wanna give two really good examples
of this new term, agentic engineering. And I
think Andre Caparthi tweeted about this,
saying that what he's doing these days
is not so much as vibe coding,
but agentic engineering. And he specifically called out
the use of the word engineering in this,
because honestly, it is engineering.
There's so much thought and a lot of designing,
system designing, and just a ton of work that goes into
this new workflow and this new practice.
And another really good example is from
Peter Steinberger,
who recently joined OpenAI.
But I saw a podcast of him with Gergay on the
Pragmatic Engineer,
and he also described that his work is
agentic engineering.
He even goes as far as to say, vibe coding is
basically a slur now.
I think, I think vibe coding is by now almost a slur.
Oh yeah.
I call it,
I tell people I do, what I do is agentic engineering with a
little star.
Vibe coding starts at 3 a.m.
And honestly, that was so relatable to me because I've
definitely been there in those late nights when I'm no
longer following the best practices and these pillars
that I'm gonna talk about.
Now, another interesting thing about all of this like
agentic engineering stuff is that
I actually discovered
a lot of these pillars on my own,
just through working with AI models every single day.
And it kind of started before Opus 4.5 came out.
But when that model came out, something like
really shifted in the way I started to work because the
models just became so capable and the tools around
the model just had this moment
where everything just clicked. And that's why
you see ClockCode and CodexApp and all these
agentic coding apps are just blowing up right now.
And it's so interesting to me that
all of these people that are actively building with these
things are all kind of diverging on these
like common
topics, common things that are turning out to be this
thing called agentic engineering. Okay,
that was a long-winded setup, but let's
get right into
what is agentic engineering. Pillar number one is
context engineering.
And if you've seen any of my previous ClockCode videos,
I think context engineering is king.
Context is king. Context is best served fresh
and condensed.
Now, all of these pillars are very important, but in
my opinion,
context is probably the most important thing. You know,
garbage in, you get garbage out, right?
Now, a lot of people will say,
hey, John,
just feed it everything. We have such large context
window these days, does it even matter? And in
my opinion, even with the large context window,
I don't think you should be trying to optimize for using
all of it. Because the way these models actually work is
that it's basically a statistical output, right?
It's a statistical chance that something will happen,
some output will be created based on the data that you
feed it in. So for context engineering,
you really need to think about what is the exact
right amount of context that I need to give to the
model so that it can do its work better.
Nothing more, nothing less.
And if you look at ClockCode and all of the inner workings
of it, you know, the slash commands,
the sub-agents, the skills, the MCPs,
it's honestly just a tool for context engineering
that happens to have a really good agentic loop and
a model that supports it. Now, once you buy into
this concept, that context engineering really matters
and what you put into the models really matter,
the next obvious thing is
how do you organize this? How do you organize all of
this like domain knowledge and context about your code
and about your projects so that the AI can retrieve it
efficiently and effectively? This is essentially the second
brain concept. The second brain in a nutshell is how do
you store context that isn't about the code itself,
but about the domain around the code,
like product, product information,
product specs,
config decisions, domain rules, everything that an engineer
actually keeps inside of their head, where should
that live
so that the AI can retrieve it easily? And there's many
ways to do this. For ClockCode, for example,
you can have a local version of your .cloud and you
could just
put a bunch of things in there. I do this for things
that may not belong in the code base directly. And the
other obvious way is committing it directly into
the code base. Recently, OpenAI ran this experiment
and wrote about it in this article called
Harness Engineering.
And here they were saying that they're pushing more
and more things into the code base for the AI to
have context.
Basically, they're optimizing the code base for the AI
rather than just what we deem normally acceptable
for humans.
So a really interesting insight and a rule that they
discovered through this experiment is that if the
domain knowledge doesn't exist in the code base,
then it doesn't exist for the agents at all.
So to me, that was really interesting because like I said,
we have so much that's just locked up right here
when we work with like just other people outside of the
code base. You know, decisions for meetings,
business rules,
some new architecture choices that we decided.
And when the agent doesn't inherently just know this,
we just complain that the agent is not working well.
But what if you started compacting all of this
domain knowledge into
markdown files or documentation
and everything that the agent needs, they can
retrieve it using some rag system.
What I've been doing with my work is really figuring
out like what are the key things. I need to put into
the code base directly so others can use it? And what
are the things that I want in my workflow locally?
So these are the things that I'm thinking about.
And there's smart ways to do this because over time,
if you really go deep on this second brain concept,
you'll realize that you'll have
a ton
of markdown files everywhere.
So like indexing things properly that points to other
markdown files,
like all of these things, the second brain concept,
I think is a whole field of, of engineering that is gonna
be a big thing. It already started with like
rag systems,
but this is just another layer on top of
agentic engineering.
Now, pillar number two is agentic validation. We just
discussed that context is king and context is the
most important,
but for agentic validation, it's really asking
the question,
what kind of context is good? And in my opinion,
a way to self validate an agent is gonna be one of the
most important things for the agent's output to be
dramatically better. Boris Chen, the creator of
Cloud Code, talked about this in his workflows when he
posted about it sometime in January.
So if you give an agent a way to validate his
own work,
for example, like backend tasks,
maybe some integration tests or unit tests, for front end,
like client work, it might be the agent actually just
navigates the Chrome browser and take screenshots
and validates itself, right?
And maybe for mobile, you can actually use the
ADB to simulate interactions. Whatever the validation is,
in my opinion, this is where a lot of
creative engineering will happen. And Boris
mentioned that having this validation is a big difference
between you're getting crappy output
versus something that actually works and
is validated.
And like I said, this is where a lot of interesting
creative engineering is gonna happen,
this agentic validation loop, right? For example,
validation in my opinion is very, very hard,
especially for
like UI validation. How do you know that this
interaction actually works?
We don't really have really good video models in the loop
yet with agent decoding,
but how do you do that without it?
Screenshots are okay, but it's not perfect. But you know,
you could do things like create maybe a domain
specific language
that knows how to navigate your app using like the ADB
simulator for mobile, for example.
Like there's all these things that you can think about
and do. And there's another layer of like logging.
What are the observable things that the agent can
see right now to help itself validate?
For example, in that article, OpenAI started using a
log QL
to be able to log a bunch of files during the validation
loop so that the agent can carry the logs and
validate that, oh,
the data is actually correct as well, rather than just
relying on tests. And these are the things that you
should be asking yourself for your own code base and
your own agentic loops.
Does the AI have enough data from its
validation loop? Is the visual feedback loop enough? Or is
there other mechanisms that you haven't thought of that
the agent can use to self-validate? And I think
agentic validation, in my opinion, is gonna be a
huge part of agentic engineering. Now,
pillar number three is around agentic tooling,
and this ties directly into agentic validation. But I
think it's a large enough subject that it should be a
thing of its own. In this interview,
Peter Steinberger talks about this topic a lot, and he
describes it as friction.
What are the things
that are blocking the agent? What are the friction pieces
in the agentic loop
that the agent is struggling on?
And we've seen this develop through many different
channels already, right? ChatGPT and Gemini,
they have search, agentic search. This is
probably a really good example of agentic tooling.
Deep research, multimodal, task systems,
all of the things that ChatGPT and Gemini is
adding into their chat interface,
that's something you could think about as an
agentic tool.
But you can go a layer deeper.
If you look at OpenClaw, which is a really good
example of this, a lot of OpenClaw skills,
they actually just point to CLI tools.
And Peter even mentioned that every time he ran into
something where the agent can't do something, he just
first reached to build a CLI.
And because he had built all these CLI tools to do a bunch
of these like agentic orchestrations before,
OpenClaw was able to be super successful because it's
leveraged all of these things to get work done where
previously the agent was not able to do. So in your
own workflow, these are the things that you should be
actively thinking about and actively building and finding
ways for the agent to handle. You essentially
need to get to a point where humans are no longer
the bottleneck when it comes to the
agentic execution.
Whatever is slowing down the agents,
recognize that that is a huge opportunity right now.
And should you create a CLI tool or should you like find it
or build a specific skill to like automate that workflow?
Whatever it takes, you really need to think
about actively pursuing to remove that friction from
the agent. So the next time you run into something when
you're coding where you have to manually change
something or like there is no end point, so you have to like
go to that website and change something.
Think about ways so that you can build a system or a
tool that the agent can use. So you don't have to
manually ever do that again.
Now, pillar number four is about agentic code bases.
So the question you should ask yourself right now is,
is your code base optimized for AI agents?
I would say most brownfield projects
aren't optimized for agents at all. You know,
think about your code base.
How much of it is dead code or bad patterns? How much
of competing frameworks is in your codebase?
Maybe you are partway through a migration that
never finished and now your codebase have two different
patterns for doing the same thing. We all know
that our codebases that we work at at work or
wherever has these kind of things
but right now is a moment you should be actively
cleaning that up. Cleaning up your codebase
and doing better engineering has never been more
important than right now because every time bad
context goes into your agentic loop
it's basically like the poisoning the agent
and then you might wonder why like hey why is this
agent doing this other thing that I don't want it to do?
Like I said the agents are probabilistic in nature right?
So if your code has weird competing patterns then you
need to get rid of it. You need to actively get rid
of it. So dead code and bad patterns is all one thing
but in OpenAI's article they're even going a
step further. They're optimizing their file
structure so that it's always consistent. So that
the AI can always generate things consistently.
They're even adding logging
that is like agent specific so that the agent can read the
logs and things like that. And they're creating
documentation not just for humans but for the agent so
that they can keep track of the domain knowledge.
Essentially they encode what they called the golden
principles that directly into the repo. They're very
opinionated about the rules and they keep things very
consistent for future agents to run not future humans.
And in my opinion, this is an area where
we as engineers have to really think about what are
good principles. You know, does dry really matter?
Does solid matter? Does not commenting your code in a
way that like really matter? There's all these things that
we have,
you know, as engineers have defined as good
but I think a lot of that is going to change and a lot of
this is still being figured out. What does an agentic
codebase look like in the future? Because you
need to remember that you're not just writing code.
For the next engineer anymore.
You're writing code for the next agent to run.
Now pillar number five is when all of these things
come together and it's called compound engineering.
Dan Schipper co-founder of every talked about
this concept. I think he essentially coined the term
and it's a really powerful one if you think about it.
Now all of the things that I've been talking about
context engineering, agentic validation,
agentic tooling, agentic
codebase optimizations. If you do all these things,
if you push everything into the codebase so that the
agent can like see it and share it and then you all
engineers working on this are bought into these concepts
of agentic engineering, then you have this new
behavior where it compounds over time,
you know, so the next time you optimize some workflow
with a new skill and then you land it or you develop a
new MCP because there's no good api's or tools already
every time you add those things and then you add it
into the working library your working codebase. Then this
compounds and that's exactly
compound engineering. And the reason why I
mentioned this as like this last point is
because all of these things that I just talked about you
really need to like internalize this and then like spread this
out because one of the most common things that I've seen
in my work is that people make workflows people do
things locally and then everyone kind of works
slightly different. Everyone has
different workflows.
That's actually a huge thing about cloud code.
It's very customizable, but I think in the future,
teams will be more like that open AI team who's
essentially all agreed all bought into this concept and
they're compounding the work the compounding the
knowledge compounding the tools that the agent can use
and over time making those agents be able to just
self-validate and keep going and essentially have the code
build itself. And in my opinion like having this
mindset this last final piece of compound engineering.
I think it's a piece that you really need to bring back to
your teams.
So that's it. Those are the five pillars. Five pillars of
agentic engineering. Now, I don't have everything
figured out. I'm still experimenting
still learning by building new things every single day every
single week, you know, some days you'll feel like this
where you're building some some custom tool for the
agent or some custom validation for the agent and
it's just not working and you might have burned hours
and hours going in circles and going back and forth
and might think that hey, maybe I should just like
written this myself.
I think you should really challenge yourself to
try to avoid that innate reaction because you know,
I myself love to write code and I wrote an interesting
article about mourning the loss of coding,
but this is the future and I genuinely think that this is
where engineering is going to go and the gap between
people who are going to understand this agentic
engineering and the people who are just still
vibe coding or coding by hand. I think it's going to
get wider every single month month over month as sad as
it is to say I do. I truly believe the era of coding by
hand is dead.
It's sad, but it's true.
So let me know in the comments. I would love
to hear what your workflow is looking like.
If any of this resonates with you also sign up for my
newsletter push to prod. I write once a week or twice
a week and there's some content that's not here that
is there and if you're interested in AI coding, I have
these videos for you, especially this cod code one
that's been doing really well.
But yeah,
I hope you guys enjoy this video and until I see you on
the next one.

https://youtu.be/FqPwHHrN1bg?list=TLGGCf49njjVshkxODAzMjAyNg